Admin (Postman)

Modules Overview:
Before you start
Set up your team
Set up your team
Team Discovery
Team Discovery
Billing & Administrative Settings
Billing & Administrative Settings
Check your knowledge
Quiz: Build your team with Postman
Wrapping up
Resources
Recap 

 Before you start

So, you've been tasked with implementing Postman for your organization. You're starting in the right place! 
Learning objectives

At Postman, we love our admins and recognize that you are one of the most important functions to get Postman off the ground at your organization. While your team focuses on maintaining multiple versions of an API, assigning and controlling ownership and permissions, all while collaborating smoothly; your role as Admin is to define and structure this setup to ensure your teams can hit their goals.

In this course, you will learn the essential setup best practices to successfully administer Postman for your organization. We will cover topics such as setting and changing team details, setting up SSO if applicable, inviting team members, updating roles of team members, and managing licenses. Let’s dive in! 
Getting help

If you get stuck along the way and re-reading the instructions doesn't unblock you, reach out to academy@postman.com 


Let's begin!



Team Discovery

Welcome to Getting Started with Admins: Team Discovery!

Like with many things in life, if something is easily discoverable and readily available, people are more likely to use it. The same can be said for Postman, and you as an admin hold the keys to increasing discoverability for your organization. At Postman, we recognize that team discovery promotes collaboration. From speaking with our customers, we know that fostering collaboration is a main focal point when launching Postman. The team discovery feature allows people from your organization to see your team on Postman and request to join. 


If you turn on team discovery, a user who already has access to Postman can now request to join your team. Most customers include a membership question when they turn on Team Discovery. We often see admins entering in a question like, “What team do you work for?” in order to gather more information about the requester. Naturally, you will have the ability to accept or reject their request.

Quizes:

Question 1: correct answer

Which two of the following activities are responsibilities of an admin? (Select two)
->Managing the team’s public profile on Postman’s API Network
Maintaining Private API versions
->Inviting new and managing existing users
Setting up and managing mock servers
Controlling ownership of each team collection
Question 2: Correct answer

Which two of the following can people outside your team see on a public team profile? (Select two)
Resource Usage
->APIs
User roles
->Collections
Private workspaces
Question 3: Correct answer

Why would you turn on Pay-as-you-go?
->To prevent mock servers and monitor usage from being paused if you hit your limit
To establish a payment structure for people using your public APIs
To pay an individual fee for each new Postman user on your team
To turn on the monthly payment option for Postman
Question 4: Correct answer

How does Team Discovery help promote collaboration within an organization?
Allows all users of a team to discover any private workspace and request to join
->Allows users who already have Postman access to discover the team and request to join
Enables admins to discover the most active users in the team so they can be promoted to team leads
Enables admins to discover users who already have Postman access and invite them to join the team


Resources

Postman-created resources
Learning Center

    Managing your team 
    Roles and Permissions 
    Onboarding Checklist 
    Creating Workspaces 
    Using and Managing Workspaces 
    Working with your team
    Migrating Data Between Teams
    Billing

Postman Blog

    Introducing Team Discovery

Help Center

    Billing and Payment FAQ

Postman Website

    Postman Pricing


Recap

In this course, you learned some of the most fundamental tasks you need to complete as an admin of Postman. You learned how to:

    Manage your members, roles and team profile settings
    Increase discoverability with Team discovery
    Access and edit your billing information like history, resource utilization and plan details

In the next course, you'll take it a step further, understanding how to better secure your Postman instance using SSO and more! 

Collaborate at scale with postman:

 Before you start

So, you've been tasked with implementing Postman for your organization and securing your instance. You've come to the right place! 
Learning objectives

In this module, you will learn about some of the exciting Enterprise features that Postman customers use every day to help secure their accounts quickly and safely! You'll learn how to create and manage groups, enable SCIM provisioning and navigate to and digest various summary reports. Let’s dive in! 
Getting help

If you get stuck along the way and re-reading the instructions doesn't unblock you, reach out to academy@postman.com 


Let's begin!

Creating and maintaining user groups
Provision and deprovisioning: Large organizations



Activate User:
.Create
-Creates a new user on your postman team if one doesn't already exist
-Activates the user to authenticate into your postman team

Deactivate User:
.Remove
-Removes a user from your postman team and deactivates their account
-Blocks the account from authenticating into postman 

Reactivate User
.Revive
-Reactivate an existing deactivated user by unblocking the account's authentication into postman
-Adds the account back to your postman team


Reporting Fundamentals:
In an enterprise postman


Quizes:


Question 1: Correct answer

What are two advantages of creating and maintaining Groups? (Select two)
->To mimic your organizational structure
Group users based upon product usage
Group users together based upon geographic location
->Easily manage roles for every member of a group
Question 2: Correct answer

When creating a new user through SCIM, which of the following roles will be assigned to the user by default?
->Developer
Billing
Admin
Community Manager
Question 3: Correct answer

Which of the following reports shows you the total number of user actions in a workspace over time, including creating, editing and deleting requests, collections, APIs and environments?
->Team Activity report
Resource Usage report
Response Time report
Uptime report
Overview report

 Resources

Postman-created resources
Learning Center

    Managing User Groups
    Configuring SCIM with Okta 
    Configuring SCIM with Azure AD
    Configuring SCIM with OneLogin
    Team Details Reports
    All Workspaces
    Security Audit Report
    All API Reports
     

Recap

In this course, you learned the security and time saving benefits of an Enterprise Postman license. You specifically learned how to:

    Create and manage groups in Postman
    Enable SCIM provisioning in your organization
    Navigate to and digest the various summary reports within the reports tab

Stay tuned for more Postman Admin content Before you start

So, you've been tasked with implementing Postman for your organization and securing your instance. You've come to the right place! 
Learning objectives

In this module, you'll up-level your Postman Admin knowledge! You will learn how to set up authentication and determine the proper roles and permissions for your users. Let's dive in!
Getting help

If you get stuck along the way and re-reading the instructions doesn't unblock you, reach out to academy@postman.com 


Let's begin!!


Authentication in Postman

Welcome to Getting Started with Admins: Authentication in Postman!

Single Sign-On (SSO) services make it easy to manage your team’s identity across all the SaaS products that you use.

SSO services permit a user to use one set of login credentials to access multiple applications. The service authenticates the end user only once for all the applications the user has been given rights to and eliminates further prompts when the user switches applications during the same session. An example of SSO you may be familiar with is Google's implementation of login for their products, such as Gmail, YouTube, and so on. Any user that is logged in to one of Google's products is automatically logged in to their other products as well.

Prerequisite:

To set up SSO with Postman, your team’s Identity Provider (IdP) must support the SAML 2.0 standard. The resources on the following page will show you how to properly Configure SSO for your team.


Roles and permissions in postman :
1.Super Admin
2. Admin
3. Billing
4. Developer
5. Community Manager


Quizes:


Question 1: Correct answer

Which two of the following roles are workspace-level roles? (Select two)
Super Admin
Billing
->Editor
->Viewer
Developer
Question 2: Correct answer

Which of the following roles allows you to manage the public visibility of workspaces and team profiles?
Admin
->Community Manager
Editor
Billing
Question 3: Correct answer

Which two of the following roles must an admin grant to a user who needs to create APIs as part of their daily jobs? (Select two)
->Editor
Billing
->Developer
Admin
Community Manager


Resources

To set up SSO for your organization, select your provider below for detailed instructions:

    Intro to SSO
    Logging in to an SSO Team
    Microsoft AD FS
    Azure AD
    Duo
    Google Workspace
    Okta
    OneLogin
    Ping Identity
    Defining Roles


Recap

In this course, you learned some of the most critical tasks you need to complete to properly secure your Postman organization. You learned:

    The necessary setup requirements for your organization's SSO
    The importance of roles and the various actions each role can take.

In the next course, you'll take it a step further, understanding how to collaborate at scale.



Secure your team with postman:
